README.md, before:

Predicting Rain in Australia
==============================

Project Aim
------------
The aim of the project is to predict if it will rain tomorrow based on todays weather.

Data Exploration
------------
The given Dataset from Australia has 23 different columns and contains 145460 data entrys.
The target column is RainTomorrow, which is a Boolean. The target is unevenly distibuted (fewer rainy days).
The Data for today contains information about the date, the city, temperature, humidity, pressure, wind, clouds, sunshine and rain. Most variables are numeric. Categorical values are the location , wind related values (e.g. wind direction). Rains today is a boolean.
The dataset contains measurements from 49 citys/places.

Missing values in %
Date              0.000000
Location          0.000000
MinTemp           1.020899
MaxTemp           0.866905
Rainfall          2.241853
Evaporation      43.166506
Sunshine         48.009762
WindGustDir       7.098859
WindGustSpeed     7.055548
WindDir9am        7.263853
WindDir3pm        2.906641
WindSpeed9am      1.214767
WindSpeed3pm      2.105046
Humidity9am       1.824557
Humidity3pm       3.098446
Pressure9am      10.356799
Pressure3pm      10.331363
Cloud9am         38.421559
Cloud3pm         40.807095
Temp9am           1.214767
Temp3pm           2.481094
RainToday         2.241853
RainTomorrow      2.245978

How  to proceed with missing values: 
- delete entrys with over 10% of missing values
- replace Nans for cateforical variables with mode
- replace Nans for numerical variables with median

First Observation
------------
If it rains today, there is 50% chance that it also rains tomorrow. If it does not rain today, it will most likely also not rain tomorrow.

Preprocessing data
------------
- How  to proceed with missing values: 
    - delete entrys with over 10% of missing values
    - replace Nans for cateforical variables with mode
    - replace Nans for numerical variables with median
- delete Date column since it is not used for modelling (note from Reviewer: Not sure yet about this, at least it is probably reduntant since it is highly correlated with the other values.)
- encode RainToday and RainTomorrow in binary variable (0/1) (note from Reviewer: Or as Boolean (True/False), maybe we will choose a binary decision tree)
- encode location and variables for wind direction with get_dummies
- Should we include Scaling? (note from Reviewer, most likely yes, I would propose a vector normalization or Min/Max normalization


Project Organization
------------

    ├── LICENSE
    ├── README.md          <- The top-level README for developers using this project.
    ├── data
    │   ├── external       <- Data from third party sources.
    │   ├── interim        <- Intermediate data that has been transformed.
    │   ├── processed      <- The final, canonical data sets for modeling.
    │   └── raw            <- The original, immutable data dump.
    │
    ├── logs               <- Logs from training and predicting
    │
    ├── models             <- Trained and serialized models, model predictions, or model summaries
    │
    ├── notebooks          <- Jupyter notebooks. Naming convention is a number (for ordering),
    │                         the creator's initials, and a short `-` delimited description, e.g.
    │                         `1.0-jqp-initial-data-exploration`.
    │
    ├── references         <- Data dictionaries, manuals, and all other explanatory materials.
    │
    ├── reports            <- Generated analysis as HTML, PDF, LaTeX, etc.
    │   └── figures        <- Generated graphics and figures to be used in reporting
    │
    ├── requirements.txt   <- The requirements file for reproducing the analysis environment, e.g.
    │                         generated with `pip freeze > requirements.txt`
    │
    ├── src                <- Source code for use in this project.
    │   ├── __init__.py    <- Makes src a Python module
    │   │
    │   ├── data           <- Scripts to download or generate data
    │   │   └── make_dataset.py
    │   │
    │   ├── features       <- Scripts to turn raw data into features for modeling
    │   │   └── build_features.py
    │   │
    │   ├── models         <- Scripts to train models and then use trained models to make
    │   │   │                 predictions
    │   │   ├── predict_model.py
    │   │   └── train_model.py
    │   │
    │   ├── visualization  <- Scripts to create exploratory and results oriented visualizations
    │   │   └── visualize.py
    │   └── config         <- Describe the parameters used in train_model.py and predict_model.py

--------

<p><small>Project based on the <a target="_blank" href="https://drivendata.github.io/cookiecutter-data-science/">cookiecutter data science project template</a>. #cookiecutterdatascience</small></p>

Step SQL)
Task: store data in a local database (SQL)
Solution: src/data/convert_data_to_sql.py 
-> takes the big weatherAUS.cvs from this source: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jsphyg/weather-dataset-rattle-package?resource=download
-> converts it into a table called weather_table in weather_australia.db and save it in data/raw
src/test.sql.py 
-> checks for missing/extra columns and the right data type in the table (so far float or string)
src/data/make_dataset.py
-> loads the sql, ignores specific columns and simply filter (e.g the location) the big database. The results will be saved in data/raw
--note: for first instances the data folder and the database are not gitignored!!
-> make dataset filters the .db for e.g location or select a random amonúnt of data for the subset and save it as .csv with current date

Working with a real MySQL project.
- no databases are shared directly, raw data is weatherAUS.csv
- everybody needs to execute mySQL for database handling, either in docker or MYSQL workbench
STEP-BY-STEP guide
- install MYSQL
- initiating a MYSQL Connection (more infos on How To Do here: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/workbench/en/wb-getting-started-tutorial-create-connection.html)
- creating the schema: e.g. rain_australia
- running the script "create_table.sql" (change the first line (USE {your schema name}))
    - it creates the empty table
- running the script "import_data.sql" (change the third line (LOAD DATA INFILE 'your path', for me the table needed to be in the MY SQL SERVER folder))
    - it fills the empty table and can handle the 'NA' values from the raw data
- running the script "test_table.spl.sql" (change the first line (USE {your schema name}))
    - it should create an output with 145460 (number of rows in the table)
-> probably more useful in containerization


MySQL dockerization:

- build Docker image:
    - docker build -t weather-mysql .

- in another terminal "docker ps" for container ID

Enter MySQL client:
- e.g. docker exec -it c3ecfcd4a529  mysql -u root -proot (Container ID = c3ecfcd4a529, Password= root)
check the table with USE weather_db;SELECT COUNT(*) FROM weather_data;SELECT * FROM weather LIMIT 5; -> Outcome: 14560
- exit with quit



MLFLOW

- mlflow_server.sh 
    * sets up the mlflow server (http://localhost:8080)
- train model with simple mlflow architecture for tracking    

Dockerization 
---------------------------
MLFlow and model(containing training, predicting and FastAPI) services are added to `docker-compose.yml`.
The MLflow image is located at `docker_images/Dockerfile_mlflow`, while the model image is at `docker_images/Dockerfile_model`.

- to start(or build if not exists) the containers:
```bash
docker-compose up
```
- to test the FastAPI:
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start test_model
```
- to train the model
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start training
```
- to predict
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start predict
```

Use the training image built from `docker/training/Dockerfile.training`.

1) Start MLflow on host (repo root, venv optional):
```
mlflow server --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080 --backend-store-uri sqlite:///mlflow.db --default-artifact-root ./mlartifacts
```

2) Build the image:
```
docker build -t weather-training -f docker/training/Dockerfile.training .
```

3) Run training in Docker (set MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI to your host IP):
```
docker run --rm -e MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI=http://<your-host-ip>:8080 weather-training python -u src/models/train_model.py
```

Docker (prediction container)
-----------------------------
Prediction uses the latest trained model from local MLflow artifacts (`mlartifacts`) and writes a CSV with predictions.  
Training and prediction both use the **same Docker image** (`weather-training`); only the command and mounted volumes differ.

1) Make sure training has been run at least once (so `mlartifacts/**/artifacts/model.pkl` exists).

2) Run prediction in Docker from the repo root.

**Linux / macOS:**
```bash
docker run --rm -it \
  -v "$PWD/data:/app/data" \
  -v "$PWD/mlartifacts:/app/mlartifacts" \
  weather-training python -u src/models/predict_model.py \
    /app/data/processed/weatherAUS_10percent_preprocessed.csv \
    /app/data/processed/weather_predictions.csv
```

**Windows PowerShell:**
```powershell
$proj = (Get-Location).Path
docker run --rm -it `
  -v "$proj\data:/app/data" `
  -v "$proj\mlartifacts:/app/mlartifacts" `
  weather-training python -u src/models/predict_model.py `
    /app/data/processed/weatherAUS_10percent_preprocessed.csv `
    /app/data/processed/weather_predictions.csv
```

This will:
- Load the latest `model.pkl` from `mlartifacts/**/artifacts/model.pkl`
- Evaluate on the input file
- Save predictions to `data/processed/weather_predictions.csv` on the host.

Commit message:

add sql and data processing into docker compose (#17)
* build: add mysql-connector-python and remove pip dependency

* refactor(docker): update Dockerfiles and paths for better organization

- Add MYSQL_HOST env variable and fix paths in mysql/Dockerfile
- Update paths and add requirements installation in make_and_process_data/Dockerfile
- Simplify CMD command in make_and_process_data/Dockerfile
- Update database connection details and table names in make_dataset.py

* refactor(data): restructure data processing files and update Dockerfile

Move data processing scripts to src/data directory and update Dockerfile accordingly
Refactor make_dataset and preprocessing scripts to be more modular and maintainable
Update file paths and add proper return types for better code clarity

* refactor: streamline data pipeline and update docker configuration

- modify make_dataset to return only file paths instead of dataframe
- update preprocessing to take input file path and return output path
- adjust train_model to accept preprocessed file path
- add dataset and preprocessing endpoints to weather_api
- update Dockerfile to include PYTHONPATH and change CMD
- add test_model.py for pipeline testing

* refactor(docker): put mysql image to the docker compose

- Remove make_and_process_data Dockerfile as it's no longer needed
- Update mysql Dockerfile to use new data path
- Restore model Dockerfile to run API instead of tests
- Update docker-compose to include mysql service and add make_dataset/preprocess services

* update README

* update README

README.md, after:

Predicting Rain in Australia
==============================

Project Aim
------------
The aim of the project is to predict if it will rain tomorrow based on todays weather.

Data Exploration
------------
The given Dataset from Australia has 23 different columns and contains 145460 data entrys.
The target column is RainTomorrow, which is a Boolean. The target is unevenly distibuted (fewer rainy days).
The Data for today contains information about the date, the city, temperature, humidity, pressure, wind, clouds, sunshine and rain. Most variables are numeric. Categorical values are the location , wind related values (e.g. wind direction). Rains today is a boolean.
The dataset contains measurements from 49 citys/places.

Missing values in %
Date              0.000000
Location          0.000000
MinTemp           1.020899
MaxTemp           0.866905
Rainfall          2.241853
Evaporation      43.166506
Sunshine         48.009762
WindGustDir       7.098859
WindGustSpeed     7.055548
WindDir9am        7.263853
WindDir3pm        2.906641
WindSpeed9am      1.214767
WindSpeed3pm      2.105046
Humidity9am       1.824557
Humidity3pm       3.098446
Pressure9am      10.356799
Pressure3pm      10.331363
Cloud9am         38.421559
Cloud3pm         40.807095
Temp9am           1.214767
Temp3pm           2.481094
RainToday         2.241853
RainTomorrow      2.245978

How  to proceed with missing values: 
- delete entrys with over 10% of missing values
- replace Nans for cateforical variables with mode
- replace Nans for numerical variables with median

First Observation
------------
If it rains today, there is 50% chance that it also rains tomorrow. If it does not rain today, it will most likely also not rain tomorrow.

Preprocessing data
------------
- How  to proceed with missing values: 
    - delete entrys with over 10% of missing values
    - replace Nans for cateforical variables with mode
    - replace Nans for numerical variables with median
- delete Date column since it is not used for modelling (note from Reviewer: Not sure yet about this, at least it is probably reduntant since it is highly correlated with the other values.)
- encode RainToday and RainTomorrow in binary variable (0/1) (note from Reviewer: Or as Boolean (True/False), maybe we will choose a binary decision tree)
- encode location and variables for wind direction with get_dummies
- Should we include Scaling? (note from Reviewer, most likely yes, I would propose a vector normalization or Min/Max normalization


Project Organization
------------

    ├── LICENSE
    ├── README.md          <- The top-level README for developers using this project.
    ├── data
    │   ├── external       <- Data from third party sources.
    │   ├── interim        <- Intermediate data that has been transformed.
    │   ├── processed      <- The final, canonical data sets for modeling.
    │   └── raw            <- The original, immutable data dump.
    │
    ├── logs               <- Logs from training and predicting
    │
    ├── models             <- Trained and serialized models, model predictions, or model summaries
    │
    ├── notebooks          <- Jupyter notebooks. Naming convention is a number (for ordering),
    │                         the creator's initials, and a short `-` delimited description, e.g.
    │                         `1.0-jqp-initial-data-exploration`.
    │
    ├── references         <- Data dictionaries, manuals, and all other explanatory materials.
    │
    ├── reports            <- Generated analysis as HTML, PDF, LaTeX, etc.
    │   └── figures        <- Generated graphics and figures to be used in reporting
    │
    ├── requirements.txt   <- The requirements file for reproducing the analysis environment, e.g.
    │                         generated with `pip freeze > requirements.txt`
    │
    ├── src                <- Source code for use in this project.
    │   ├── __init__.py    <- Makes src a Python module
    │   │
    │   ├── data           <- Scripts to download or generate data
    │   │   └── make_dataset.py
    │   │
    │   ├── features       <- Scripts to turn raw data into features for modeling
    │   │   └── build_features.py
    │   │
    │   ├── models         <- Scripts to train models and then use trained models to make
    │   │   │                 predictions
    │   │   ├── predict_model.py
    │   │   └── train_model.py
    │   │
    │   ├── visualization  <- Scripts to create exploratory and results oriented visualizations
    │   │   └── visualize.py
    │   └── config         <- Describe the parameters used in train_model.py and predict_model.py

--------

<p><small>Project based on the <a target="_blank" href="https://drivendata.github.io/cookiecutter-data-science/">cookiecutter data science project template</a>. #cookiecutterdatascience</small></p>

Step SQL)
Task: store data in a local database (SQL)
Solution: src/data/convert_data_to_sql.py 
-> takes the big weatherAUS.cvs from this source: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jsphyg/weather-dataset-rattle-package?resource=download
-> converts it into a table called weather_table in weather_australia.db and save it in data/raw
src/test.sql.py 
-> checks for missing/extra columns and the right data type in the table (so far float or string)
src/data/make_dataset.py
-> loads the sql, ignores specific columns and simply filter (e.g the location) the big database. The results will be saved in data/raw
--note: for first instances the data folder and the database are not gitignored!!
-> make dataset filters the .db for e.g location or select a random amonúnt of data for the subset and save it as .csv with current date

Working with a real MySQL project.
- no databases are shared directly, raw data is weatherAUS.csv
- everybody needs to execute mySQL for database handling, either in docker or MYSQL workbench
STEP-BY-STEP guide
- install MYSQL
- initiating a MYSQL Connection (more infos on How To Do here: https://dev.mysql.com/doc/workbench/en/wb-getting-started-tutorial-create-connection.html)
- creating the schema: e.g. rain_australia
- running the script "create_table.sql" (change the first line (USE {your schema name}))
    - it creates the empty table
- running the script "import_data.sql" (change the third line (LOAD DATA INFILE 'your path', for me the table needed to be in the MY SQL SERVER folder))
    - it fills the empty table and can handle the 'NA' values from the raw data
- running the script "test_table.spl.sql" (change the first line (USE {your schema name}))
    - it should create an output with 145460 (number of rows in the table)
-> probably more useful in containerization


MySQL dockerization:

- build Docker image:
    - docker build -t weather-mysql .

- in another terminal "docker ps" for container ID

Enter MySQL client:
- e.g. docker exec -it c3ecfcd4a529  mysql -u root -proot (Container ID = c3ecfcd4a529, Password= root)
check the table with USE weather_db;SELECT COUNT(*) FROM weather_data;SELECT * FROM weather LIMIT 5; -> Outcome: 14560
- exit with quit



MLFLOW

- mlflow_server.sh 
    * sets up the mlflow server (http://localhost:8080)
- train model with simple mlflow architecture for tracking    

Dockerization 
---------------------------
three docker containers: `mysql`, `MLFlow` and `model` services are added to `docker-compose.yml`.

The mysql image is located at `mysql/Dockerfile`, the MLflow image is located at `docker_images/Dockerfile_mlflow`, while the model image is at `docker_images/Dockerfile_model`.

- `mysql` container hosts all the raw data
- `MLFlow` container hosts the mlflow server
- `model` container hosts the data substracting, data preprocessing, training, predicting, and FastAPI services
  - `test_model` container triggers the command to test the FastAPI service
  - `make_dataset` container triggers the command to substract the data from the whole data base (hosted by `mysql`)
  - `preprocess` container triggers the command to preprocesse the sub-dataset (created by `make_dataset`)
  - `training` container triggers the command to train the model based on the preprocessed data (created by `preprocess`)
  - `predict` container triggers the command to predict the value based on the model (trained by `training`)


- to start(or build if not exists) the docker compose:
```bash
docker-compose up
```
- to test the FastAPI:
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start test_model
```
- to substract the data from the whole data base:
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start make_dataset
```
- to preprocess the sub-dataset
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start prepocess
```
- to train the model
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start training
```
- to predict
```bash
# in a new terminal
docker-compose start predict
```

Use the training image built from `docker/training/Dockerfile.training`.

1) Start MLflow on host (repo root, venv optional):
```
mlflow server --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080 --backend-store-uri sqlite:///mlflow.db --default-artifact-root ./mlartifacts
```

2) Build the image:
```
docker build -t weather-training -f docker/training/Dockerfile.training .
```

3) Run training in Docker (set MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI to your host IP):
```
docker run --rm -e MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI=http://<your-host-ip>:8080 weather-training python -u src/models/train_model.py
```

Docker (prediction container)
-----------------------------
Prediction uses the latest trained model from local MLflow artifacts (`mlartifacts`) and writes a CSV with predictions.  
Training and prediction both use the **same Docker image** (`weather-training`); only the command and mounted volumes differ.

1) Make sure training has been run at least once (so `mlartifacts/**/artifacts/model.pkl` exists).

2) Run prediction in Docker from the repo root.

**Linux / macOS:**
```bash
docker run --rm -it \
  -v "$PWD/data:/app/data" \
  -v "$PWD/mlartifacts:/app/mlartifacts" \
  weather-training python -u src/models/predict_model.py \
    /app/data/processed/weatherAUS_10percent_preprocessed.csv \
    /app/data/processed/weather_predictions.csv
```

**Windows PowerShell:**
```powershell
$proj = (Get-Location).Path
docker run --rm -it `
  -v "$proj\data:/app/data" `
  -v "$proj\mlartifacts:/app/mlartifacts" `
  weather-training python -u src/models/predict_model.py `
    /app/data/processed/weatherAUS_10percent_preprocessed.csv `
    /app/data/processed/weather_predictions.csv
```

This will:
- Load the latest `model.pkl` from `mlartifacts/**/artifacts/model.pkl`
- Evaluate on the input file
- Save predictions to `data/processed/weather_predictions.csv` on the host.
